# Developer Guide

The repository contains two main components located in `cmd/protoc-gen-gorums`:

* **dev:** Contains static code and code generated by templates.
  In other words, this is the code that the `protoc-gen-gorums` plugin will output.
  All files that are not prefixed by `zorums*` and do not end in `_test.go` get bundled into `template_static.go`.
* **gengorums:** Contains the code for the `protoc-gen-gorums` plugin, as well as templates.

## Workflow and File Endings

1. Changes should be made to the development code in `dev`:
   * Changes to "dynamic" code, i.e. code that is dependent on protobuf
     definitions, should by done be editing the respective `.tmpl` files.
   * Changes to "static" code, i.e. code that is **not** dependent on
     protobuf definitions, should be done by editing the respective `.go`
     files.

2. Any changes to templates or static code requires the invocation of `make`.
  This is to:
   * Bundle the static code into `template_static.go`
   * Rebuild the `protoc-gen-gorums` plugin
   * Update the `zorums_*_gorums.pb.go` files

See the Makefile for more details.

## Testing

TODO: update doc:
Testing the `protoc-gen-gorums` plugin itself can be done by running `make test`.
These tests verify that the code generated by the plugin is correct and stable.

Testing the generated code can be done by running tests in the `tests/` folder.

## Benchmarking

See [benchmarking.md](./benchmarking.md)

## Makefile

Below is a description of the current Makefile targets.
The Makefile itself also serves as documentation; inspect it for details.

| Target            | Description                                                                  |
| ----------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `dev`             | updates `template_static.go` and regenerates generated files from templates. |
| `benchmark`       | Compiles the benchmark.                                                      |
| `tools`           | Installs required tools such as `protoc-gen-go` and `protoc-gen-go-grpc`.    |
| `installgorums`   | Reinstalls the `protoc-gen-gorums` plugin.                                   |
| `bootstrapgorums` | Used to bootstrap the plugin.                                                |
| `test`            | Run Gorums tests.                                                            |
