doc/method-options.md, before:

# Available Options and Their Meaning

To select a call type for a Protobuf service method, specify one of the following options.
Gorums currently supports these call types (they cannot be combined):

| Call type   | Gorums option       | Description                                                       |
| ----------- | ------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Ordered RPC | no option           | FIFO-ordered synchronous RPC to a single node.                    |
| Unicast     | `gorums.unicast`    | FIFO-ordered one-way asynchronous unicast.                        |
| Multicast   | `gorums.multicast`  | FIFO-ordered one-way asynchronous multicast.                      |
| Quorum Call | `gorums.quorumcall` | FIFO-ordered synchronous quorum call on a configuration of nodes. |

All call types rely on a streaming RPC call named `NodeStream` to send and receive messages to/from individual nodes.
However, the server API generated by Gorums does not expose the gRPC stream-based API.
Instead, the generated API is similar to unary gRPC, except for the handling of return values is different.

## Async and Correctable Variants

Quorum calls support asynchronous and correctable variants through *terminal methods* on the `Responses` object, not through proto options:

**Async variants** return a future (`*Async[T]`) that can be awaited later:

```go
future := ReadQC(cfgCtx, req).AsyncMajority()
// Do other work...
reply, err := future.Get()
```

**Correctable variants** provide progressive updates as more responses arrive:

```go
corr := ReadQC(cfgCtx, req).Correctable(2)  // Initial threshold
reply, level, err := corr.Get()
<-corr.Watch(3)  // Wait for higher level
reply, level, err = corr.Get()
```

See the [User Guide](user-guide.md) for details on terminal methods and response handling.

## Interceptors for Request/Response Transformation

Gorums provides interceptors to transform requests and responses on a per-node basis.
Interceptors are passed as call options and can be chained together.

### MapRequest Interceptor

Transform requests before sending to each node:

```go
cfgCtx := config.Context(ctx)
resp, err := WriteQC(cfgCtx, req,
    gorums.Interceptors(
        gorums.MapRequest(func(req *WriteRequest, node *gorums.Node) *WriteRequest {
            // Customize request for each node
            return &WriteRequest{Value: fmt.Sprintf("%s-node-%d", req.Value, node.ID())}
        }),
    ),
).Majority()
```

### MapResponse Interceptor

Transform responses received from each node:

```go
resp, err := ReadQC(cfgCtx, req,
    gorums.Interceptors(
        gorums.MapResponse(func(resp *ReadResponse, node *gorums.Node) *ReadResponse {
            // Transform response, e.g., add node ID
            resp.NodeID = node.ID()
            return resp
        }),
    ),
).Majority()
```

### Map Interceptor

Apply both request and response transformations:

```go
resp, err := ReadQC(cfgCtx, req,
    gorums.Interceptors(
        gorums.Map(
            func(req *ReadRequest, node *gorums.Node) *ReadRequest {
                // Transform request
                return &ReadRequest{Key: fmt.Sprintf("%s-shard-%d", req.Key, node.ID())}
            },
            func(resp *ReadResponse, node *gorums.Node) *ReadResponse {
                // Transform response
                resp.NodeID = node.ID()
                return resp
            },
        ),
    ),
).Majority()
```

### Multicast/Unicast with MapRequest

```go
// Send different messages to each node in a multicast
cfgCtx := config.Context(ctx)
WriteMulticast(cfgCtx, msg,
    gorums.Interceptors(
        gorums.MapRequest(func(msg *WriteMessage, node *gorums.Node) *WriteMessage {
            return &WriteMessage{Shard: node.ID()}
        }),
    ),
)
```

**Note:** If `MapRequest` returns `nil` for a node, the message will not be sent to that node.

## Example Protobuf Definitions

Below is shown a list of RPC service methods, illustrating how to configure the different variants.

```proto
service Storage {
  // ReadOrdered is a FIFO-ordered RPC to a single node.
  rpc ReadOrdered(ReadRequest) returns (State) {}

  // ReadQC is a FIFO-ordered synchronous quorum call.
  // Use terminal methods (.Majority(), .First(), etc.) to retrieve results.
  // Use .AsyncMajority() for async variant, .Correctable(n) for correctable variant.
  rpc ReadQC(ReadRequest) returns (State) {
    option (gorums.quorumcall) = true;
  }

  // ReadQCStream is a FIFO-ordered synchronous quorum call with server streaming.
  // The stream keyword enables correctable calls where nodes can send multiple
  // progressive updates. Use .Correctable(n) to watch for updates as they arrive.
  rpc ReadQCStream(ReadRequest) returns (stream State) {
    option (gorums.quorumcall) = true;
  }

  // WriteMulticast is an asynchronous multicast to all nodes in a configuration.
  // No replies are collected.
  rpc WriteMulticast(State) returns (Empty) {
    option (gorums.multicast) = true;
  }

  // WriteUnicast is an asynchronous unicast to a single node.
  // No reply is collected.
  rpc WriteUnicast(State) returns (Empty) {
    option (gorums.unicast) = true;
  }

  // Write is a synchronous quorum call.
  // Per-node transformations can be applied using MapRequest/MapResponse interceptors.
  rpc Write(State) returns (WriteResponse) {
    option (gorums.quorumcall) = true;
  }
}
```

## Custom Interceptors

Beyond the built-in `MapRequest`, `MapResponse`, and `Map` interceptors, you can create custom interceptors for logging, filtering, or other cross-cutting concerns.

An interceptor has access to a `clientCtx` that provides:

- `.Request()` - the original request
- `.Config()` - the configuration being used
- `.Method()` - the RPC method name
- `.Nodes()` - all nodes in the configuration
- `.Node(id)` - get a specific node by ID
- `.responseSeq` - the response iterator (can be wrapped)

### Chaining Interceptors

Multiple interceptors can be passed to `gorums.Interceptors()` and are executed in order:

```go
cfgCtx := config.Context(ctx)
resp, err := ReadQC(cfgCtx, req,
    gorums.Interceptors(
        loggingInterceptor,
        gorums.MapRequest(transformFunc),
        filterInterceptor,
    ),
).Majority()
```

### Example: Logging Interceptor

Create a logging interceptor that wraps the response iterator:

```go
func LoggingInterceptor[Req, Resp proto.Message]() gorums.QuorumInterceptor[Req, Resp] {
    return func(ctx *clientCtx[Req, Resp]) {
        startTime := time.Now()
        log.Printf("[%s] Starting quorum call with request: %v", ctx.Method(), ctx.Request())

        // Wrap the response iterator to log each response
        oldSeq := ctx.responseSeq
        ctx.responseSeq = func(yield func(gorums.NodeResponse[Resp]) bool) {
            count := 0
            for resp := range oldSeq {
                count++
                if resp.Err != nil {
                    log.Printf("[%s] Node %d error: %v", ctx.Method(), resp.NodeID, resp.Err)
                } else {
                    log.Printf("[%s] Node %d response received", ctx.Method(), resp.NodeID)
                }
                if !yield(resp) {
                    log.Printf("[%s] Iteration stopped after %d responses", ctx.Method(), count)
                    return
                }
            }
            log.Printf("[%s] Completed: %d responses in %v", ctx.Method(), count, time.Since(startTime))
        }
    }
}

// Usage
resp, err := ReadQC(cfgCtx, req,
    gorums.Interceptors(LoggingInterceptor[*ReadRequest, *ReadResponse]()),
).Majority()
```

### Example: Response Filtering Interceptor

Filter out responses that don't meet certain criteria:

```go
func FilterInterceptor[Req, Resp proto.Message](
    shouldInclude func(Resp) bool,
) gorums.QuorumInterceptor[Req, Resp] {
    return func(ctx *clientCtx[Req, Resp]) {
        oldSeq := ctx.responseSeq
        ctx.responseSeq = func(yield func(gorums.NodeResponse[Resp]) bool) {
            for resp := range oldSeq {
                // Skip responses that don't pass the filter
                if resp.Err == nil && !shouldInclude(resp.Value) {
                    continue
                }
                if !yield(resp) {
                    return
                }
            }
        }
    }
}

// Usage: only include responses with timestamp > threshold
threshold := time.Now().Add(-1 * time.Hour)
resp, err := ReadQC(cfgCtx, req,
    gorums.Interceptors(
        FilterInterceptor[*ReadRequest, *ReadResponse](func(r *ReadResponse) bool {
            return r.GetTimestamp().AsTime().After(threshold)
        }),
    ),
).Majority()
```

### Example: Retry Interceptor

Add automatic retry logic for failed nodes:

```go
func RetryInterceptor[Req, Resp proto.Message](maxRetries int) gorums.QuorumInterceptor[Req, Resp] {
    return func(ctx *clientCtx[Req, Resp]) {
        oldSeq := ctx.responseSeq
        ctx.responseSeq = func(yield func(gorums.NodeResponse[Resp]) bool) {
            retries := make(map[uint32]int)
            for resp := range oldSeq {
                if resp.Err != nil && retries[resp.NodeID] < maxRetries {
                    retries[resp.NodeID]++
                    // Retry logic would go here (requires more infrastructure)
                    log.Printf("Retrying node %d (attempt %d/%d)", resp.NodeID, retries[resp.NodeID], maxRetries)
                }
                if !yield(resp) {
                    return
                }
            }
        }
    }
}
```

**Note:** Interceptors have direct access to the `clientCtx` type from the gorums package. The exact field names and available methods can be found in `client_interceptor.go`.

Commit message:

doc: clarify API behavior and streaming support in method options

doc/method-options.md, after:

# Available Options and Their Meaning

To select a call type for a Protobuf service method, specify one of the following options.
Gorums currently supports these call types (they cannot be combined):

| Call type   | Gorums option       | Description                                                       |
| ----------- | ------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Ordered RPC | no option           | FIFO-ordered synchronous RPC to a single node.                    |
| Unicast     | `gorums.unicast`    | FIFO-ordered one-way asynchronous unicast.                        |
| Multicast   | `gorums.multicast`  | FIFO-ordered one-way asynchronous multicast.                      |
| Quorum Call | `gorums.quorumcall` | FIFO-ordered synchronous quorum call on a configuration of nodes. |

The generated API is similar to unary gRPC, unless the stream keyword is used in the proto definition.
Server streaming is only supported for quorum calls.
Client streaming is not supported.

The client-side API is significantly different from gRPC's unary API in that it returns a `*Responses[T]` object instead of a single value.
The `Responses` object is used to collect responses from a configuration of nodes.
Users may iterate over the responses using a range loop, or use terminal methods to retrieve results directly.

There is no generated client interface or service methods.
Users should invoke Gorums' call type through generated functions.

## Async and Correctable Variants

Quorum calls support asynchronous and correctable variants through *terminal methods* on the `Responses` object.

**Async variants** return a future (`*Async[T]`) that can be awaited later:

```go
future := ReadQC(cfgCtx, req).AsyncMajority()
// Do other work...
reply, err := future.Get()
```

**Correctable variants** provide progressive updates as more responses arrive:

```go
corr := ReadQC(cfgCtx, req).Correctable(2)  // Initial threshold
reply, level, err := corr.Get()
<-corr.Watch(3)  // Wait for higher level
reply, level, err = corr.Get()
```

See the [User Guide](user-guide.md) for details on terminal methods and response handling.

## Interceptors for Request/Response Transformation

Gorums provides interceptors to transform requests and responses on a per-node basis.
Interceptors are passed as call options and can be chained together.

### MapRequest Interceptor

Transform requests before sending to each node:

```go
cfgCtx := config.Context(ctx)
resp, err := WriteQC(cfgCtx, req,
    gorums.Interceptors(
        gorums.MapRequest(func(req *WriteRequest, node *gorums.Node) *WriteRequest {
            // Customize request for each node
            return &WriteRequest{Value: fmt.Sprintf("%s-node-%d", req.Value, node.ID())}
        }),
    ),
).Majority()
```

### MapResponse Interceptor

Transform responses received from each node:

```go
resp, err := ReadQC(cfgCtx, req,
    gorums.Interceptors(
        gorums.MapResponse(func(resp *ReadResponse, node *gorums.Node) *ReadResponse {
            // Transform response, e.g., add node ID
            resp.NodeID = node.ID()
            return resp
        }),
    ),
).Majority()
```

### Map Interceptor

Apply both request and response transformations:

```go
resp, err := ReadQC(cfgCtx, req,
    gorums.Interceptors(
        gorums.Map(
            func(req *ReadRequest, node *gorums.Node) *ReadRequest {
                // Transform request
                return &ReadRequest{Key: fmt.Sprintf("%s-shard-%d", req.Key, node.ID())}
            },
            func(resp *ReadResponse, node *gorums.Node) *ReadResponse {
                // Transform response
                resp.NodeID = node.ID()
                return resp
            },
        ),
    ),
).Majority()
```

### Multicast/Unicast with MapRequest

```go
// Send different messages to each node in a multicast
cfgCtx := config.Context(ctx)
WriteMulticast(cfgCtx, msg,
    gorums.Interceptors(
        gorums.MapRequest(func(msg *WriteMessage, node *gorums.Node) *WriteMessage {
            return &WriteMessage{Shard: node.ID()}
        }),
    ),
)
```

**Note:** If `MapRequest` returns `nil` for a node, the message will not be sent to that node.

## Example Protobuf Definitions

Below is shown a list of RPC service methods, illustrating how to configure the different variants.

```proto
service Storage {
  // ReadOrdered is a FIFO-ordered RPC to a single node.
  rpc ReadOrdered(ReadRequest) returns (State) {}

  // ReadQC is a FIFO-ordered synchronous quorum call.
  // Use terminal methods (.Majority(), .First(), etc.) to retrieve results.
  // Use .AsyncMajority() for async variant, .Correctable(n) for correctable variant.
  rpc ReadQC(ReadRequest) returns (State) {
    option (gorums.quorumcall) = true;
  }

  // ReadQCStream is a FIFO-ordered synchronous quorum call with server streaming.
  // The stream keyword enables correctable calls where nodes can send multiple
  // progressive updates. Use .Correctable(n) to watch for updates as they arrive.
  rpc ReadQCStream(ReadRequest) returns (stream State) {
    option (gorums.quorumcall) = true;
  }

  // WriteMulticast is an asynchronous multicast to all nodes in a configuration.
  // No replies are collected.
  rpc WriteMulticast(State) returns (Empty) {
    option (gorums.multicast) = true;
  }

  // WriteUnicast is an asynchronous unicast to a single node.
  // No reply is collected.
  rpc WriteUnicast(State) returns (Empty) {
    option (gorums.unicast) = true;
  }

  // Write is a synchronous quorum call.
  // Per-node transformations can be applied using MapRequest/MapResponse interceptors.
  rpc Write(State) returns (WriteResponse) {
    option (gorums.quorumcall) = true;
  }
}
```

## Custom Interceptors

Beyond the built-in `MapRequest`, `MapResponse`, and `Map` interceptors, you can create custom interceptors for logging, filtering, or other cross-cutting concerns.

An interceptor has access to a `clientCtx` that provides:

- `.Request()` - the original request
- `.Config()` - the configuration being used
- `.Method()` - the RPC method name
- `.Nodes()` - all nodes in the configuration
- `.Node(id)` - get a specific node by ID
- `.responseSeq` - the response iterator (can be wrapped)

### Chaining Interceptors

Multiple interceptors can be passed to `gorums.Interceptors()` and are executed in order:

```go
cfgCtx := config.Context(ctx)
resp, err := ReadQC(cfgCtx, req,
    gorums.Interceptors(
        loggingInterceptor,
        gorums.MapRequest(transformFunc),
        filterInterceptor,
    ),
).Majority()
```

### Example: Logging Interceptor

Create a logging interceptor that wraps the response iterator:

```go
func LoggingInterceptor[Req, Resp proto.Message]() gorums.QuorumInterceptor[Req, Resp] {
    return func(ctx *clientCtx[Req, Resp]) {
        startTime := time.Now()
        log.Printf("[%s] Starting quorum call with request: %v", ctx.Method(), ctx.Request())

        // Wrap the response iterator to log each response
        oldSeq := ctx.responseSeq
        ctx.responseSeq = func(yield func(gorums.NodeResponse[Resp]) bool) {
            count := 0
            for resp := range oldSeq {
                count++
                if resp.Err != nil {
                    log.Printf("[%s] Node %d error: %v", ctx.Method(), resp.NodeID, resp.Err)
                } else {
                    log.Printf("[%s] Node %d response received", ctx.Method(), resp.NodeID)
                }
                if !yield(resp) {
                    log.Printf("[%s] Iteration stopped after %d responses", ctx.Method(), count)
                    return
                }
            }
            log.Printf("[%s] Completed: %d responses in %v", ctx.Method(), count, time.Since(startTime))
        }
    }
}

// Usage
resp, err := ReadQC(cfgCtx, req,
    gorums.Interceptors(LoggingInterceptor[*ReadRequest, *ReadResponse]()),
).Majority()
```

### Example: Response Filtering Interceptor

Filter out responses that don't meet certain criteria:

```go
func FilterInterceptor[Req, Resp proto.Message](
    shouldInclude func(Resp) bool,
) gorums.QuorumInterceptor[Req, Resp] {
    return func(ctx *clientCtx[Req, Resp]) {
        oldSeq := ctx.responseSeq
        ctx.responseSeq = func(yield func(gorums.NodeResponse[Resp]) bool) {
            for resp := range oldSeq {
                // Skip responses that don't pass the filter
                if resp.Err == nil && !shouldInclude(resp.Value) {
                    continue
                }
                if !yield(resp) {
                    return
                }
            }
        }
    }
}

// Usage: only include responses with timestamp > threshold
threshold := time.Now().Add(-1 * time.Hour)
resp, err := ReadQC(cfgCtx, req,
    gorums.Interceptors(
        FilterInterceptor[*ReadRequest, *ReadResponse](func(r *ReadResponse) bool {
            return r.GetTimestamp().AsTime().After(threshold)
        }),
    ),
).Majority()
```

### Example: Retry Interceptor

Add automatic retry logic for failed nodes:

```go
func RetryInterceptor[Req, Resp proto.Message](maxRetries int) gorums.QuorumInterceptor[Req, Resp] {
    return func(ctx *clientCtx[Req, Resp]) {
        oldSeq := ctx.responseSeq
        ctx.responseSeq = func(yield func(gorums.NodeResponse[Resp]) bool) {
            retries := make(map[uint32]int)
            for resp := range oldSeq {
                if resp.Err != nil && retries[resp.NodeID] < maxRetries {
                    retries[resp.NodeID]++
                    // Retry logic would go here (requires more infrastructure)
                    log.Printf("Retrying node %d (attempt %d/%d)", resp.NodeID, retries[resp.NodeID], maxRetries)
                }
                if !yield(resp) {
                    return
                }
            }
        }
    }
}
```

**Note:** Interceptors have direct access to the `clientCtx` type from the gorums package. The exact field names and available methods can be found in `client_interceptor.go`.
